Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Harry Harrison is one of the pioneers of adventure science fiction.
His death row trilogy, written in the 1960s, is a prime example.
Recently Harrison completed another adventure series entitled To The Stars, a trilogy comprising
Homeworld, Wheelworld and Starworld.
In Homeworld we find a 500 year distant Britain under the heels of a strong government.
In Wheelworld we find a planet whose harsh conditions are reminiscent of earlier Harrison novels.
In the final novel Starworld we find America 500 years from now.
As it turns out Harrison wrote the middle installment, Wheelworld, first.
The trilogy came about through the inability I have to just take the situation as set.
I know what I got the idea from when I was in California on the freeway with my friend
Brian Aldous.
We were in a horrible little English sprite which was about 8 inches high and 2 feet wide
and it goes a maximum of 50 miles an hour.
And we're turning along five lane freeway, California 5, great big articulated trucks
with trails going by with 14 foot high wheels.
I'm looking at the bottom of hubcaps, you know, trying to keep this thing going straight.
And God I had a vision at that point of a world where trucks ran forever on and on and
on, through and around the whole planet.
I said, how can we do that?
So I had to develop a whole plant and a culture to get them there.
And by the time I'd done it and written the book, they had to say, I feel it's incomplete.
How did they get there in the first place?
And what happened to that revolution afterwards?
And I said, you're right, I've got so much plotting in here.
I have a whole book before and a book afterwards.
So I took the character, he'd ride this plant for nameless reasons and it ended with the
revolution which is going wrong.
So I went back and told you how he got there, which took on earth and I closed the book
together in the final one.
They came out different, the one middle one was written first.
They had to be a different aspect, you know, then the third one of course put the first
two together.
Harrison was able to assemble a number of his plot devices in this series and there
was a message as is usual for Harrison.
I use different things at different times and they're high technology and enjoyment
of technology and a little bit of politics and the first one is some ways like a make-room,
make-room and so where are we going to go if we don't get a hold of technology and what
we can do.
If you notice there's a very, the first book shows you how rotten Britain will be five
hundred years from now, the third book, how rotten America will be five hundred years
from now and all done for good intentions with lack of knowledge of how to go about
taking care of helping people and they're both rotten worlds.
So there again the admonitory thing is being shaken.
No, this is you, you must get technologies involved, you must do somehow, not guess,
you must just somehow do a better job of ruling the world, you know.
We're in a technological world and nobody in the British Parliament or the American Senate
or legislation knows anything about science.
I mean we, a bunch of ex-lawyers and politicians, politicians have one motivation life, that's
to get reelected.
Look at the whole mix and trouble came about because all he wanted to do was be reelected
and just didn't care what you do and that's the wrong thing.
I'm not saying, I can't see any easy answers to it, I'm just saying that there are answers.
We are now a technology revolution, we now are going into the computer world and no one
has consistently thought what will happen to most people and in a way behind all the
adventure stories there is a consideration of those problems.
Harrison told us that the grim future depicted in the To the Stars trilogy has its roots
in Orwell's 1984.
The first book plot wise and character wise is a tip of the hat, another head to George
Orwell's 1984.
I even used the word, leaders for pint and their, his thing, they were drinking leaders
instead of pints.
I used the word proles, I put the clues in there for you to find and the brother-in-law
character is the same torturer character from Brian O'Brien, no Brian, no Brian was
the other fellow.
It is the man who knows he's evil and is in charge of an evil society and that's why
he's in the first book.
But having not killed him off in the first, he has to appear again and then you get what
I thought was the only truthful ending and ambiguous ending to the third one.
People hate me for what happened, I said that's what life is.
Science fiction gives you easy answers but in real life there are no easy answers.
We'll have more with Harry Harrison on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
Science Fiction author Harry Harrison writes many styles of science fiction.
One of these is adventure science fiction.
Here he tells us how he came to write Planet of No Return, the sequel to an earlier effort,
Planet of a Damned.
The experiences of publishing produced strange offspring.
I wrote Planet of a Damned years ago.
In a way it's death will one more time, with slight differences.
I wrote Death of a Five or Six Times and one guy is another until I decided to break out
and do Bill a Galactic Hero.
And did that, it was completely into itself and then a few years ago publisher was doing
these illustrated books which really aren't just juveniles, it's what they are.
They are really short novel pictures in them for kids.
And unlike most science fiction writers I ran out of money at the time and he said,
how do you do an illustrated book for me?
I said no, he said we'll give you X number of thousand dollars and I said yes.
And I shopped around my older books and I saw I could do a sequel, a fast paced adventure
book with a little content as well.
There's a little bit about women's rights in there if you look closely at the end.
You know, they're all male fascist swineys guy.
I'd love to kill each other.
And a little bit of plot and mystery plot.
It's been an option for a film to make a nice fast film.
You know, it was not a bad book, it's a juvenile, done for a certain market.
Not ashamed of it or proud of it, just a book I did and there it is.
Humor is another Harrison trademark.
The Technicolor Time Machine is a vintage Harrison humor novel.
Yet when he began it Harrison intended for it to be quite serious.
In the Technicolor Time Machine I applied this very, very serious book.
Time travel and I got this pop-up, so a tan camera and back facing this great big nine-foot tall
fly can I start to laugh.
And it came out funny but if you look there's a very solid time travel plot which could be a serious book.
Except I say in real life I started laughing and I'm laughing why shouldn't the readers laugh
and the way the thing went it took off that way.
And I think it had that serious structure beneath it.
But Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers on the other hand was intended to be funny from a start.
Star Smashers of the Galaxy Rangers was just, I was feeling a deadly mood one day and I was so tired of rubbish.
I was so tired, you know, dear old Doc Smith wrote his space operas back in the 30s and 40s.
That's a long time ago and at the period form of art I think it's dead.
But I keep seeing certain writers who shall be nameless rehashing old space operas.
I said oh I had enough of this.
So I said why not just put the boot to all the space operas one time have fun doing it.
And I made internal parodies of everyone I could think of.
People accused me of hating Doc Smith.
I said no I don't like, I love Docs.
I'm like, we're bringing Doc Smith.
But I just don't, I think the feel is dead.
I'd like to put a tombstone over it.
Not that you ever can in fiction.
There's still going on doing it anyway.
But I enjoy myself.
The reeds enjoy it.
I mean the two kind of rears.
Some say you're hating Doc Smith, you know, they chase me around.
Others say, I feel a whole bunch here.
You know, so there it is.
It takes your choice.
One of Harrison's latest novels is actually science fiction, but it's being marketed as
a mainstream book.
A rebel in time was a definite attempt to, between myself and the publisher, I had the
idea.
I saw the idea as being something that the non-science fiction reader would buy.
Science fiction sells 20% of all fiction in the United States in paperback which is not
bad.
But being a writer I see 80% more I could sell.
And publishers like to sell more too.
So we talked about the novel.
I said it's pure science fiction, but it starts out as a mystery novel.
And it's a good core of the way into it before the science fiction element is brought in.
And it's a science fiction element that the reader will accept, any general reader.
And that time he's trapped.
10, 20 years ago I couldn't have done that.
Because I had no big name and the reeds would not have bought it.
Now I have enough readers around.
They'll see my name on it.
They'll look at it, open it, maybe buy.
The science fiction reader is.
So I don't think we'll lose one science fiction reader by packaging it that way.
We might pick up a lot of other readers which make me happy, my publisher happy, my wife
happy, my children, my bank manager.
You know all the things we want to make happy.
We'll talk with Harry Harrison about short stories on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Although Science Fiction author Harry Harrison is noted for his many fine novels, he's an
accomplished short story writer as well.
He gave us some thoughts on short stories.
In science fiction, unlike a lot of other fiction, there are people who write both short stories
and novels.
Most, some can, but a lot of them can.
And very simply, it is least residual.
A short story is a one-idea story with a single gimmick or device or a turn of plot.
You write that to length and stop it at two or three or four or five thousand words.
If it's complicated, it goes to ten thousand novelette.
As opposed to a novel, which is a complex thought that requires modifications, more than
one idea, ramifications, and then it goes to novel length.
And many times I first started writing, I had short story ideas.
And they're very good to do.
They go in the magazines, they go in anthologies, read, recognize your name.
And deliberately between novels would do a half dozen short stories.
Unhappily, after a number of years of writing, you find publishers want to give you more
money for novels.
And they really do.
The word rate per word in the novel is about ten times the short story.
And I find myself telling to cook one novel at the end of the other.
I've written a short story in three or four or five years, which I think the shame is
I have four collections of short stories out all selling quite nicely.
And they've been apologizing about 22 languages.
One of Harrison's best known short stories is rescue operation.
It tells about an alien that crash lands in Yugoslavia and of the alien's fate in the
hands of an ignorant superstitious priest.
Harrison's travels in Yugoslavia inspired this story.
Rescue operation came out.
Everything in there I know except the alien.
In Yugoslavia, most broken down country in Western Europe, they have peasants there,
which are much more broken down than German peasants.
They have deeply religious, simple, mindless, stupid people burning peasants within ten
miles of a nuclear reactor.
Perfect analog of our world.
Instead of northern civilized countries, southern poor, uncivilized countries, all in one country.
And having been in the middle of this and having had a number of desperately awful things
happen to me and my family down there, the children got scarlet fever, had injections
with blunt needles, had a carium screaming, you know, sort of thing.
And I got living in that desperate, awful world.
And there it got in the background was there.
And then the thought, instead of arriving in Central Park in front of the White House,
the alien from space arrived there.
Voila.
You know, complete.
Just a matter of riding it.
Another well-known Harrison short story is Mute Milton, the story of a black man whose
bus stops in a small southern town a few years ago.
This moving gut-wrenching story was inspired by an incident in Harrison's life.
Harrison's anger, which comes across clearly in the story, was genuine.
Living in Scandinavia, but now this dates two or three or four years, and the dings
are absolutely colorblind.
That in fact in those days, really certain kind of girls only date black men.
They all go, look, just look down upon them.
There were about four black men in the whole country, you know.
And you know, you just have this very easy to be pro-race, anti-race, if you're in a
country with no race problems.
But living there, the children growing up there, and Martin Luther King was shot, and
a newspaper called me and asked me what my opinion on it, you know, and all horrified.
And then I pick a copy of Newsweek up, and they had some great big belly Alabama.
I photographed him with a shotgun in one hand, a nose picker in the other, and his belly
hanging over his belt, you know, saying, well, just one more nigger to me.
And I just, my white heat engulfed my mind.
You know, one of America's, he got a Nobel Prize earlier than that.
You know, one of America's, well, I was very proud when he came over there.
Then Scandinavia, he's an American getting a prize for doing something really good in
the world, being honored for it.
And I saw red, and the idea came to me, you know, the story just began to put into a story
that rage I had, that strong feeling.
And if I write, I can do that, well, then you're successful story.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction
Association produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane, a regional science fiction anthology.
What in the world is that?
Well, it's a collection of science fiction stories written by folks from a particular
area of the country.
Ah, you mean like New York, where science fiction really started, or like California,
where all the writers live?
Well, yes, but try Texas, because that's where the first one came out.
The first regional science fiction anthology was Lone Star Universe, and it was built
as speculative fiction and fantasy by Texans.
Oh, that's the book edited by George Proctor and Stephen Utley that came out in 1976.
It's that collection of 17 short stories written by Texans.
Right.
We got to talk to George Proctor and we asked him how the book came about.
One day, a bunch of us who had just made their first sales were sitting around laughingly
saying, yeah, one day there's gonna be enough writers in Texas that we can put out our own
anthology and to hell with all these people that'll buy our stories.
And as it was, I think that was Howard Waldrop was there, Stephen Utley, Buddy Saunders,
and we're just sitting around joking, putting a fanzine together.
And I guess I was the only person that really sort of took it seriously.
And as it was, Stephen and I put a proposal together and sent it first to a man out in
Midland, Odessa.
His name escapes me now, but he was doing Texana type books.
And he came back and liked the idea, but wasn't going to pick it up and suggested we send it to Heidelberg Press in Austin.
And we did and they picked it up.
And by that time, there were enough known writers in Texas and award winners that it really did seem feasible and seem like a good idea.
And that put together.
Sort of interesting.
It makes for a lot of jokes, you know, regional science fiction, but our thought was, you know, Texana's in and here's this whole realm that's never been really looked at.
And what's funny is it sparked a lot of other regional science fiction books.
It was the first and everybody chuckled and laughed.
And then there was about five that came out on its heels because it had never been thought of.
And what was funny is that I meet new editors in New York.
And they know my name be a lone star universe rather than some of the novels I've done, which is surprising.
But again, New York is surprised by new ideas.
And that's, I think, the reason it was noticed.
And that's why it's so interesting.
Hey, I know a lot about science fiction and I have this vast collection of science fiction books.
Well, maybe it's only half vast.
But anyway, I've never seen a copy of Lone Star Universe, let alone heard of it.
What gives?
There's a good reason for that.
Proctor told us that the book received only limited distribution.
Heidelberg stopped publishing as best I can tell just about the time they brought out the book.
There were big plans to do posters and everything to go with the book.
Full posters of the cover, which the cover is gorgeous.
It's one of those double take covers.
And as it was, they sort of went out of business about that time.
And far as I know, only a few thousand were distributed and they're still sitting in a warehouse somewhere.
Making a scarce item.
It's surprising that you go to conventions, large conventions in and out of state.
And there will always be several people asking me how you get a copy of the book.
It's rare because it was not distributed.
And there's apparently tons of the books still around.
You just can't get ahold of them.
It's a nice item to have for a collector.
Well, you can bet I'm going to be on the lookout for that book.
In the meantime, we'll have more about Lone Star Universe on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Last time we talked about Lone Star Universe, the first regional science fiction anthology.
Edited by George Procter and Stephen Utley, Lone Star Universe is a collection of short stories written by Texans.
The anthology is a sought after collector's item.
It's not readily available because it was poorly distributed when it was published in 1976.
We talked with one of the editors, George Procter, and we asked him if the book might someday be reprinted, perhaps as a paperback.
I don't think so because I think it is, you know, it's a limited item to Texana.
I really think it has more value as Texana than it does to the science fiction field.
As a whole, those science fiction collectors want it because it is a first.
The stories are good.
I think there's a wide variety of stories.
Science fiction reviews that I saw of it, their complaint was that there was a wide variety of stories in there.
It wasn't all nuts and bolts.
It wasn't all new way, but there was everything.
And that's the whole idea of the book was to show the diversity of the science fiction writers in this state.
I think it did that well.
I think it produced good stories by everybody that was in there.
Procter told us that editing a second volume of Lone Star Universe is not out of the question.
There may or may not be.
It depends on, you know, I know of one person now who has his editor for a Texas publisher.
And he has mentioned in passing that he'd like to get a hold of the first book since it never was really distributed.
It's maybe buy them all out if possible.
Well, they're not that'll ever happen.
It's something else.
But yeah, why not?
It was fun.
The people who got it seemed to enjoy it.
And I still think if it would get some sort of distribution, it would be a money making book in Texas.
Just the charisma of the state and the chauvinistic attitude of Texans, which is equivalent to New York, we're just larger.
We buy Texana.
Whether we read it or not, we buy it.
And I think there's a market for it.
So Proctor feels that Lone Star Universe might be more in demand as a collector's item for collectors of Texana than his reading material for science fiction readers.
We ask him why Texas seems to be spawning so many new science fiction writers.
They've always been around.
They've never been noted as Texan before.
And I think early 70s to mid 70s, we had a lot of fans who turned professional, started selling their stories.
They were friends from all over the state.
They suddenly became a very large group that we're selling and we're noticeable.
That this group was here, had made it, gave a lot of other folks who wanted to write incentive to do it.
And you've got suddenly a whole second wave of Texas writers coming out, meeting them here for the first time, that have just begun to sell their first stories or their first novel.
But you've suddenly got a second wave of Texas science fiction writers, which is kind of nice.
Texas writers have been rearing their heads recently and Lone Star Universe is an excellent anthology of their work.
Other regions are producing a lot of science fiction these days, notably Oregon, Florida, upstate New York and New Orleans.
But it was the Texans, with their bigger than life state and their pride, who produced the first regional anthology.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.